On August 11, the National Security Agency updated an obscure page on its website with an announcement that it plans to shift the encryption of government and military data away from current cryptographic schemes to new ones, yet to be determined, that can resist an attack by quantum computers.
“It is now clear that current Internet security measures and the cryptography behind them will not withstand the new computational capabilities that quantum computers will bring,” NSA spokesperson Vanee’ Vines stated in an email, confirming the change.
Quantum computers, once seen as a remote theoretical possibility, are now widely expected to work within five to 30 years. By exploiting the probabilistic rules of quantum physics, the devices could decrypt most of the world’s “secure” data, from NSA secrets to bank records to email passwords. Aware of this looming threat, cryptographers have been racing to develop “quantum-resistant” schemes efficient enough for widespread use.
The most promising schemes are believed to be those based on the mathematics of lattices—multidimensional, repeating grids of points.
In an ordinary computer, information is stored in units called bits that can exist in either of two states, designated 0 or 1. The computer’s computational capacity is proportional to the number of bits. In quantum computers, however, the information-storing units, called qubits, can exist in both the 0 and 1 states simultaneously. Because a system of many qubits can exist in all possible combinations of all their possible individual states, the computational capacity of a quantum computer would increase exponentially with the number of qubits.
For more than a decade after quantum computing was conceived in the early 1980s, no promising algorithms emerged, and the field languished.
All that changed in 1994 when Shor, who is now at MIT, devised a quantum computer algorithm capable of efficiently computing both prime factors and discrete logarithms, and thus of breaking both RSA encryption and the Diffie-Hellman key exchange.
In 1995, Hoffstein, with Pipher and another Brown colleague, Joe Silverman, devised a cryptographic scheme based on “cyclic” lattices, which are generated by vectors that can rotate in any direction and still land on another lattice point. NTRU, as they called the scheme, was extremely efficient—even more so than the RSA and Diffie-Hellman protocols. Although there was no proof that the cyclic lattices underlying NTRU were hard for computers to navigate, or that NTRU was secure, 20 years have passed and no one has found a way to break it, boosting confidence in its security.
The promise of lattices grew dramatically in 1997, when the IBM researchers Miklós Ajtai and Cynthia Dwork devised the first lattice-based crypto scheme that was provably as hard to break as the underlying lattice problem is hard to solve. Building on this work, Oded Regev, a theoretical computer scientist now at New York University’s Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, proved in 2005 that crypto schemes based on a problem called learning with errors (LWE) are secure against quantum computers, as long as the problem of finding the nearest point in a generic lattice is hard for quantum computers (as most researchers presume). LWE was inefficient, but Regev, Peikert and Vadim Lyubashevsky, who is now at IBM Research in Switzerland, soon developed analogous schemes based on “ideal” lattices (which are closely related to cyclic lattices), and showed that these more efficient schemes, dubbed Ring-LWE, are secure as long as the underlying, ideal lattice problem is hard.
