They are used to detect criminals evading capture, people trapped in buildings and drugs or explosives hidden in luggage. Now conservationists are recruiting the help of a sniffer dog in an effort to survey – and ultimately protect – wildlife. The canine will be trained to detect the scent of harvest mice to help better count the elusive small mammal in the British countryside.
Tui, a flat-coated retriever, will be deployed by PhD researcher Emily Howard-Williams to identify harvest mice faeces in a new project to find more effective ways of estimating the population of Britain’s smallest rodent in the wild.
Typically found in cereal fields, reed beds and hedgerows, harvest mice are thought to have declined in the past 40 years as a result of more intensive farming and habitat loss. But conservationists do not know how many are left because there has never been a reliable study to quantify this change.
The sniffer dog project, based at Moulton College, Northamptonshire, is being funded by the People’s Trust for Endangered Species (PTES) after encouraging results using trained dogs to seek out the little spotted kiwi in New Zealand. There, two English setters managed to detect 30 secretive kiwi birds, including 10 little spotted kiwis, in just four days.
Harvest mice are typically counted by researchers seeking out their woven nests, hidden among tall grasses or reeds, but Howard-Williams is investigating innovative alternatives.
She cannot take Tui into the field to sniff out nests because this might damage the mice’s habitat but will instead bring Tui’s nose to bear on harvest mouse faeces left in feeders placed in the countryside – a far quicker and much cheaper method than submitting all collected droppings to laboratory analysis.
Tui, who is Howard-Williams’ own pet, must undertake some final “discriminatory” training to ensure she can accurately pick harvest mouse droppings over pygmy shrew droppings, before getting to work within the next two months.
“She’s proving reliable with the detection, I just need to apply that method,” said Howard-Williams. “I’m very pleased with her progress – amazed, actually.”
Nida Al-Fulaij, PTES grants manager, said: “The UK enlists the help of sniffer dogs at airports, music festivals and in the army, so why not also use them for conservation purposes to find harvest mice? We are very excited to be funding this project and look forward to seeing what the results reveal about harvest mice populations in the UK.”
Sniffer dogs have also been used to help scientists locate bumblebee nests – with mixed results, as Dave Goulson, professor of biology at the University of Sussex, revealed in A Sting in the Tale. After much expensive training, a former army sniffer dog deployed to detect bumblebee nests was no better than a novice human volunteer in terms of the number of nests he could find in 20 minutes.
